.. _changelog_v030:

v0.3.5 (February 22, 2021)
--------------------------

Bugfixes
~~~~~~~~

* Very minor one, fixes to the way :class:`.Terminal` accesses the ``pilot_db.json`` file to use :attr:`.Terminal.pilots`
  property that makes a new pilot_db.json file if one doesn't exist, but otherwise loads the one that is found in
  ``prefs.get('PILOT_DB')``
* Reorganized :class:`.Terminal` source to group properties together & minor additions of type hinting
* Fixed some bad fallback behavior looking for files in old hardcoded default directories, eg. in the ye olde
  :func:`.utils.get_pilotdb`

v0.3.4 (December 13, 2020)
---------------------------

Improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~
* Unify the creation of loggers!!!! See the docs ;) :mod:`autopilot.core.loggers` : https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/pull/52/commits/d55638f985ab38044fc95ffeff5945021c2e198e https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/issues/38
* Unify prefs, including sensible defaults, refactoring of scripts into a reasonable format, multiprocess-safety, and just generally a big weight off my mind. Note that this is a **breaking change** to the way prefs are accessed. Previously one would do `prefs.PREF_NAME`, but that made it very difficult to provide default values or handle missing prefs. the new syntax is `prefs.get('PREF_NAME')` which returns defaults with a warning and `None` if the pref is not set: https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/pull/52/commits/c40a212bcaf5f184f2a6a606027fe15b1b4df59c https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/issues/38
* completely clean up scripts, and together that opened the path to clean up setup as well. so all things configuration got a major promotion
* We're on the board with CI and automated testing with a positively massive 3% code coverage!!! https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/pull/52/commits/743bb8fe67a69fcc556fa76e81f72f97f510dff7
* new scripts to eg. create autopilot alias: https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/pull/52/commits/211919b05922e18a85d8ef6216973f4000fd32c5

Bugfixes
~~~~~~~~~
* cleanup scripts on object deletion: https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/pull/52/commits/e8218304bd7ef2e13d2adfc236f3e781abea5f78 https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/issues/41
* don't drop 'floats' from gui when we say we can use them...: https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/pull/52/commits/743bb8fe67a69fcc556fa76e81f72f97f510dff7
* pigpio scripts dont like floats: https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/pull/52/commits/9f939cd78a5296db3bf318115bee0213bcd1afc0

Docs
~~~~
* Clarification of supported systems: https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/pull/52/commits/ce0ddf78b7f59f5487fec2ca7e8fb3c0ad162051
* Solved an ancient sphinx riddle of how to get data objects/constants to pretty-print: https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/pull/52/commits/ec6d5a75dada05688b6bd3c1a53b3d9e5923870f
* Clarify hardware prefs https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/pull/52/commits/f3a7609995c84848004891a0f41c7847cb754aae
* what numbering system do we use: https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/pull/52/commits/64267249d7b1ec1040b522308cd60f928f2b2ee6

Logging
~~~~~~~
* catch pigpio script init exception: https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/pull/52/commits/3743f8abde7bbd3ed7766bdd75aee52afedf47e2
* more of it idk https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/pull/52/commits/b682d088dbad0f206c3630543e96a5a00ceabe25


v0.3.3 (October 25, 2020)
--------------------------

Bugfixes
~~~~~~~~

* Fix layout in batch reassign gui widget from python 3 float division
* Cleaner close by catching KeyboardInterrupt in networking modules
* Fixing audioserver boot options -- if 'AUDIOSERVER' is set even if 'AUDIO' isn't set in prefs, should still start server. Not full fixed, need to make single plugin handler, single point of enabling/disabling optional services like audio server
* Fix conflict between polarity and pull in initializing `pulls` in pilot
* Catch ``tables.HDF5ExtError`` if local .h5 file corrupt in pilot
* For some reason 'fs' wasn't being replaced in the jackd string, reinstated.
* Fix comparison in LED_RGB that caused '0' to turn on full becuse 'value' was being checked for its truth value (0 is false) rather than checking if value is None.
* ``obj.next()`` to ``next(obj)``` in jackdserver

Improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Better internal handling of pigpiod -- you're now able to import and use hardware modules without needing to explicitly start pigpiod!!
* Hopefully better killing of processes on exit, though still should work into unified process manager so don't need to reimplement everything (eg. as is done with launching pigpiod and jackd)
* Environment scripts have been split out into ``setup/scripts.py`` and you can now run them with ``python -m autopilot.setup.run_script`` (use ``--help`` to see how!)
* Informative error when setup is run with too narrow terminal: https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/issues/23
* More loggers, but increased need to unify logger creation!!!


Cleanup
~~~~~~~~

* remove unused imports in main ``__init__.py`` that made cyclical imports happen more frequently than necessary
* single-sourcing version number from ``__init__.py``
* more cleanup of unnecessary meta and header stuff left from early days
* more debugging flags
* filter ``NaturalNameWarning`` from pytables
* quieter cleanups for hardware objects

v0.3.2 (September 28, 2020)
-----------------------------

Bugfixes
~~~~~~~~

* https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/issues/19 - previously, I attempted to package binaries for the lightly modified pigpio and for jackd (the apt binary used to not work), but after realizing that was the worst possible way of going about it I changed install strategies, but didn't entirely remove the vestiges of the prior attempt. The installation expected certain directories to exist (in autopilot/external) that didn't, which crashed and choked install. Still need to formalize a configuration and plugin system, but getting there.
* https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/issues/20 - the jackd binary in the apt repos for the raspi used to not work, so i was in the habit of compiling jackd audio from source. I had build that into the install routine, but something about that now causes the JACK-Client python interface to throw segfaults. Somewhere along the line someone fixed the apt repo version of jackd so we use that now.
* previously I had only tested in a virtual environment, but now the installation routine properly handles not being in a venv.

Cleanup
~~~~~~~

* remove bulky static files like fonts and css from /docs/ where they were never needed and god knows how they got there
* use a forked sphinx-sass when building docs that doesn't specify a required sphinx version (which breaks sphinx)
* removed skbuild requirements from install
* fixed pigpio install requirement in requirements_pilot.txt
* included various previously missed files in MANIFEST.in
* added installation of system libraries to the pilot configuration menu


v0.3.1 (August 4, 2020)
------------------------

Practice version!!! still figuring out pypi

v0.3.0 (August 4, 2020)
-----------------------------

Major Updates
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* **Python 3** - We've finally made it to Python 3! Specifically we have brought Autopilot up to compatibility with Python 3.8 -- though
  the Spinnaker SDK is currently only available through Python 3.7, so we have formally required 3.7 for now while we work on moving
  acquisition to Aravis.
  I will *not attempt to keep Autopilot compatible with Python 2*, but no decision has been made about compatibility
  with other versions of Python 3. Until then, expect that Autopilot will attempt to keep up with major version changes.
  The switch also let up update PySide (Qt library used for the GUI) to PySide2, which uses Qt5 and has a whole raft of other improvements.
* **Continuous Data Handling** - The :class:`~.data.subject.Subject` class and :mod:`~.core.networking` modules have been improved
  to handle continuous data (eg. streaming data, generally non-trialwise or non-event-sampled data). Continuous data
  can be set in a Task description either with a ``tables`` column descriptor as trial data is, but also can be set as
  ``'infer'``, for which the :class:`~.data.subject.Subject` class will wait until it receives the first data and
  automatically create a ``tables`` column depending on its type and shape. While previously we intended to nudge users
  to be explicit about declaring their data, this was necessary to allow for data that might be variable in type and shape
  to be included in a Task -- eg. it should be possible to record video data without needing to specify the resolution
  or bit depth as a hardcoded parameter in a task class. I have come to like type inference, and may make it a general
  practice for all types of data. That would potentially allow tasks to be written without explicitly declaring the
  data that they produce at all, but I haven't decided if that's a good thing or not yet.
* The **GPIO engine** has been rebuilt, relying more on ``pigpio``'s function interface. This means that GPIO timing is now
  ~microsecond precise, important for reward delivery, LED flashing, and a number of other basic infrastructural needs.
  The reorganization of hardware modules resulted in general :class:`~.gpio.GPIO`, :class:`~.gpio.Digital_In`
  and :class:`~.gpio.Digital_Out` metaclasses, making common operations like setting polarity, triggers, and pullup/down resistors
  much easier.
* Setup has been *greatly improved.* This includes proper packaging and installation with setuptools & sk-build, allowing us to finally
  join PyPI :) https://pypi.org/project/auto-pi-lot/ . Setup has been unified into a single npyscreen-based set of prompts
  that allow the user to run scripts to install libraries or configure their environment (also see :func:`~setup_autopilot.run_script` and
  :func:`~setup_autopilot.list_scripts`), set :mod:`~.prefs`, configure hardware objects (based on some very fun signature introspection),
  setup autopilot as a systemd service, etc. Getting started with Autopilot is now three commands!::

        pip install auto-pi-lot
        autopilot.setup.setup_autopilot
        ~/autopilot/launch_autopilot.sh

Minor Updates
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* **Logging** level is now set from ``prefs``, so where before, eg. every message through the networking modules would be logged to stdout,
  now only warnings and exceptions are. This gives a surprisingly large performance boost.

    * Logging has also been much improved in :mod:`~.core.networking` modules, where rather than an awkward ``do_logging`` flag
      that was used to avoid logging performance-critical events like streaming data, logging is controlled by log level throughout the system.
      By default, logging of most messages is set at ``debug`` level so they don't drown out important messages in the logs as they used to.

* **Networking** modules now only deserialize messages if they are the final recipient, saving lots of processing time -- particularly
  with streamed arrays. :class:`.Message` objects also only re-serialize messages if they have been changed.
  Message structure has been changed such that serialized messages are now of the general format::

    [sender,
     (optional) intermediate_node_1, intermediate_node_2, ...
     final_recipient,
     message_contents]


* Configuration will continue to be a point of improvement, but a few minor updates were made:

    * ``prefs.CONFIG`` will be used to signal multiple, potentially overlapping agent configurations, each of which
      may have their own system dependencies, external daemons, etc. Eg. a Pilot could
      be configured to play audio (which requires a jackd daemon to be started before Autopilot) and video
      (which requires Autopilot to be started in a X session). Checks of ``prefs.CONFIG`` are now ``in`` rather than
      ``==`` to reflect that.
    * ``prefs.PINS`` was renamed ``prefs.HARDWARE``, and now allows hardware to be configured with dictionaries rather than
      integers only. Initially ``PINS`` was meant to just contain pin numbering for GPIO objects, but having a single point of
      hardware configuration is preferable. :meth:`.Task.init_hardware` now respects all parameters set in ``prefs``.

* Throughout the code, minimal ``get_this`` type methods have begun to be replaced with ``@property`` attributes. This is because a) I
  love them and think they are magical, but b) will also be building Autopilot's closed-loop infrastructure around a Qt-style
  signal/slot architecture that wraps ``@property`` attributes so they can be ``.connected`` to one another easily.
* Previously it was possible to control presentation by *groups* of stimuli, but now it is possible to control the
  presentation frequency of individual stimuli.
* ``PySide2`` has proper support for CSS Stylesheets, so the design of Autopilot's GUI has been marginally improved,
  a process that will continue in the ceaseless quest for aesthetic perfection.
* Several setup routines have been added to make installation of opencv, pyspin, etc. easier. I also wrote a routine
  to :func:`~.setup.request_helpers.download_box` files from a URL, which is mysteriously hard to do.
* The :ref:`todo` page now reflects the full ambition of Autopilot, where before this vision was contained only in
  the whitepaper_ and a disorganized plaintext_ file in the repo.
* The :class:`~.subject.Subject` class can now export trial data :meth:`~.Subject.to_csv`. A very minor update, but
  one that is the first in a number of planned improvements to data export.
* I have also opened up a message board in google groups to make feature requests and discuss use and development, hope to see you there :)

  `<https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/autopilot-users>`_



New Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* **TRANSFORMS** have been introduced!!! :class:`~autopilot.transform.transforms.Transform` objects have a :meth:`~.Transform.process` method
  that, well, transforms data in some way. Multiple transforms can be added together to make a transformation chain. This module is still
  very young and doesn't have a developed API, but will be built to to automatic type compatibility checking, coersion, parallelization, and rhythm (FIFO/FILO) control.
  Transforms are implemented with different modalities (image, selection, logical) that imply different types of input and output data structures,
  but the hierarchical structure of the modules is still quite flat.

    * Autopilot is now integrated with DeepLabCut-live_!!!! You can now use realtime pose tracking in your experiments.
      See the dlclive_example_

* **HARDWARE** has been substantially refactored to give objects an appropriate inheritance structure. This substantially
  reduces effort duplication across hardware objects and makes a bunch of obvious capabilities available to all of them,
  for example all hardware objects are now network (:meth:`~.hardware.Hardware.init_networking`) and logging (:meth:`~.hardware.Hardware.init_logging`)
  capable.

    * **Cameras**: The :class:`.cameras.Camera_CV` class allows webcams/other simple cameras to be accessed through OpenCV,
      and the :class:`.cameras.Camera_Spinnaker` class allows FLIR and other cameras to be accessed through the Spinnaker_ SDK.
      Cameras are capable of encoding videos locally (with x264), streaming frames over the network, and making
      acquired frames available to other objects on the same computer. The :class:`~.cameras.Camera_Spinnaker` class
      provides simple ``@property`` setter/getter methods for common parameters, but also makes all ``PySpin`` attributes
      available to the user with its :meth:`~.Camera_Spinnaker.get` and :meth:`~.Camera_Spinnaker.set` methods.
      The :class:`.cameras.Camera` metaclass is written so that new camera types can be added by overriding a few methods. A
      new :class:`~.tasks.children.Video_Child` can be used to run a camera on a Child agent.
    * **9DOF Motion Sensor**: The :class:`.i2c.I2C_9DOF` class can use the LSM9DS1 sensor to collect accelerometer, magnetometer, and
      gyroscopic data to compute unambiguous position and orientation information. We will be including calibration and
      computation routines that make it easier to extract properties of interest -- eg. computing vertical motion by
      combining readings from the three sensors.
    * **Temperature Sensor**: The :class:`.i2c.MLX90640` class can use the MLX90640_ sensor to measure temperature. The
      sensor is 32x24px, which the class can :meth:`~.i2c.MLX90640.interpolate`. The class also allows frames to be integrated
      and averaged over time, substantially reducing noise. I modified the driver library to enable capture at the full
      64fps on the Raspberry Pi.

* **NETWORKING** modules can stream continuous data better in a few ways:

    * :class:`~.networking.Net_Node` modules were given a :meth:`~.Net_Node.get_stream` method that lets objects, well,
      stream data. Specifically, they are given a :class:`queue.Queue` to shovel data into, which is then picked up by a
      dedicated :class:`zmq.Socket` in its own thread, which handles batching, serialization, and load balancing. Streamed
      messages are batched (ie. contain multiple messages), but behave like normal message when received -- they are split and
      contain an ``inner_key`` that is used to call the ``listen`` with each message (see :meth:`~.Networking.Station.l_stream`).
    * :mod:`~.networking` objects also now compress arrays-in-transit with the superfast blosc_ compression library.
      This increases their throughput dramatically, as many data streams in neuroscience are relatively low-entropy
      (eg. the pixels in a video of a mostly-white arena are mostly unchanged frame-to-frame and are thus highly compressible).
      See the :meth:`.Message._serialize_numpy` and :meth:`.Message._deserialize_numpy` methods.

* **STIMULI** - The :class:`~.jackclient.JackClient` can now play continuous sounds rather than discrete sounds. An example
  can be found in the :class:`~.nafc.Nafc_Gap` task, which plays continuous white noise. All sounds now have a
  :meth:`~Jack_Sound.play_continuous` method, which continually dumps samples in a cycle into a queue for
  the :class:`~.jackclient.JackClient`. The continuous sound will be interrupted if another sound has its :meth:`.Jack_Sound.play`
  method called, but the continuous sound will resume seamlessly even if number of samples in the played sound aren't a
  multiple of the jack buffer size. We use this for gaps in noise (using the new :class:`~.sounds.Gap` class),
  which we have confirmed are sample-accurate.

* **UI & VIZ**

    * A :class:`~.plots.Video` window has been created to display streaming video. The :meth:`.Terminal_Networking.l_continuous` method
      meters frames such that even if high-speed video is being acquired, frames are only sent at a rate of ``prefs.DRAWFPS``.
      The :class:`~.plots.Video` class uses the :class:`~.plots.ImageItem_TimedUpdate` object, a slight modification of
      :class:`pyqtgraph.ImageItem`, that calls its ``update`` method according to a :class:`PySide2.QtCore.QTimer`.
    * A :attr:`~.Terminal.plots_menu` menu has been added to the Terminal, and a GUI dialog (:class:`.gui.Psychometric`)
      has been added to create simple psychometric curves with the :mod:`.viz.psychometric` module, which uses altair_.
      Plans for developing visualization are described in :ref:`todo`.
    * A general :func:`.gui.pop_dialog` function simplifies displaying messages to the user using the Terminal UI. This was an initial step
      towards improving status/error reporting from other agents, further detailed in :ref:`todo`.




Bugfixes
~~~~~~~~

* Some objects, particularly several :py:mod:`.gui` objects, had the old `mouse`/`mice` terminology updated to `subject`/`subjects`.
* :class:`.Net_Node` objects were only implicitly destroyed by their :attr:`~.Net_Node.loop_thread``s being set as daemons, and
  would thus occasionally hang and keep the program open but unresponsive. They are now explicitly closed with a
  :meth:`~.Net_Node.release` method which ends the threaded loop by setting the :attr:`~.Net_Node.closing` event.
* Embarassingly, :class:`.Pilot` objects were not prevented from running multiple tasks at a time. This led to some very
  confusing and hard-to-debug problems, as well as frequent conflicts over hardware access and resources. Typically what would
  happen is the Terminal would send a ``START`` message to begin a task, and if it wouldn't received a message receipt
  quickly enough would resend it, resulting in two tasks being started -- but this would happen whenever two ``START`` messages were sent
  to a pilot. This was fixed with a simple check of :attr:`.Pilot.state` before a task is initialized. Similar bugs were fixed in
  :class:`~.plots.Plot` objects.
* The :class:`~.data.subject.Subject` class would sometimes fail to get and increment the trial session. This has been fixed
  by saving the session number as an attribute in the ``info`` node.
* The :class:`~.data.subject.Subject` class would reset the session counter even when the same task was being reassigned (eg. if updated), now
  it preserves session number if the protocol name is unchanged.
* The :meth:`~.Terminal.update_protocols` method didn't report which subjects had their protocols updated, and so if there was some
  exception when setting new protocols it happened silently, making it so a user would never know their task was never updated.
  This was fixed with a noisier protocol update method for the Subject class and by displaying a list of subjects that were updated
  after the method is called.
* Correction trials were being calculated incorrectly by the :class:`~.managers.Stim_Manager`, such that rather than
  only repeating a stimulus *if the subject got the previous trial incorrect,* the stimulus was always repeated at least once.


Code Structure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Modified versions of external libraries have been added as git submodules in `autopilot/external`.
* Requirements files have been split out to better differentiate between different agents and use-cases.
  eg. requirements for Terminal agents are in ``requirements/requirements_terminal.txt``, requirements for build the docs are in ``requirements/requirements_docs.txt``, etc.
  This is a temporary arrangement, as a future design goal is restructuring setup routines so that they can flexibly install components as-needed (see :ref:`todo`)
* ``autopilot.core.hardware`` has been refactored into its own module, :mod:`autopilot.hardware`, and split by device type, currently...

    * :mod:`autopilot.cameras`
    * :mod:`autopilot.gpio` - devices that use the GPIO pins for standard digital I/O logic
    * :mod:`autopilot.i2c` - devices that use the GPIO pins for I2C
    * :mod:`autopilot.usb`

* The docs are hosted on readthedocs again, so the docs structure has been collapsed to a single folder without built documentation
* The autopilot user directory is now ``~/autopilot`` rather than ``/usr/autopilot``, which was always a mistake anyway.
  Autopilot creates a wayfinder ``~/.autopilot`` file that is used to find the user directory if it's set elsewhere

External Libraries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* External libraries can now be built and packaged along with autopilot using cmake, see CMakeLists.txt. Still uh having a little bit of trouble getting this to work,
  so code is in place to build and package the custom pigpio repo and jack audio but this will likely need some more work.
* pigpio `<https://github.com/sneakers-the-rat/pigpio/>`_

    * Added the ability to return absolute timestamps rather than system ticks.
      pigpio typically returns 1 32-bit integer of ticks since the daemon started, absolute timestamps are 64-bit,
      so the pigpio daemon and python interface (`pi`) were given two new methods:

            * `synchronize` gets several (default 5) sets of paired timestamps and ticks using `get_sync_time`.
              It then computes an offset for translating ticks to timestamps
            * `ticks_to_timestamp` converts ticks to timestamps based on the offset found with `synchronize`
            * `get_current_time` sends two requests to the daemon to get the seconds and microseconds of the complete
              timestamp and returns an isoformatted string

* mlx90640-library `<https://github.com/pimoroni/mlx90640-library>`_

    * Removed building examples by default which require additional dependencies
    * When using the raspi I2C driver, the baudrate would never be set to 1MHz, which is necessary to achieve full 64fps. This was fixed to use 1MHz by default.

Regressions
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Message confirmation (holding a message to resend if confirmation isn't received) was causing a huge amount of problems and needed to be rethought.
  There are in general very low rates (near-zero) of messages being dropped without some larger bug causing them, so
  confirmation has been disabled for now.
* The same is true of :meth:`~.Terminal.heartbeat` - which polled for status of connected pilots. this will be repaired and restored, as
  the terminal currently has a pretty bad idea of the status of what's connected to it. this will be part of a broader networking overhaul



.. _whitepaper: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/807693v1
.. _plaintext: https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/blob/master/notes/todo
.. _sphinx-autobuild: https://github.com/GaretJax/sphinx-autobuild
.. _altair: https://altair-viz.github.io/
.. _blosc: http://python-blosc.blosc.org/
.. _Spinnaker: https://www.flir.com/products/spinnaker-sdk/
.. _LSM9DS1: https://www.sparkfun.com/products/13944
.. _MLX90640: https://www.melexis.com/en/product/MLX90640/Far-Infrared-Thermal-Sensor-Array
.. _DeepLabCut-live: https://github.com/DeepLabCut/DeepLabCut-live/
.. _dlclive_example: https://github.com/auto-pi-lot/autopilot/blob/2to3/examples/example_transformation_dlc.ipynb