# The User Directory

After configuration, all the files you'll interact with will be in the user directory - `~/autopilot` by default.

An example user directory might look like this:

```
./autopilot
├── calibration
├── data
│   ├── subject_1.h5
│   └── subject_2.h5
├── launch_autopilot.sh
├── logs
│   ├── core.terminal.log
│   └── plugins.my_plugin.log
├── pilot_db.json
├── plugins
│   └── my_plugin
│       └── my_task.py
├── prefs.json
├── protocols
│   ├── 2afc_easy.json
│   └── 2afc_hard.json
└── sounds
```

## prefs.json

See the {mod}`.prefs` module documentation for documentation of specific preferences

The `prefs.json` file stores all the configuration options for this particular Autopilot instance, including
configurations of local hardware objects, audio output, etc. Each agent will have its own combination of prefs
determined by :class:`.prefs.SCOPES`. 

## pilot_db.json

The `pilot_db.json` file is used by the {class}`.Terminal` to keep track of which pilots have been configured to
connect to it. For each pilot the Terminal will create a set of widgets (see {mod}`.gui.widgets.terminal`) to control it
as well as {mod}`~.gui.plots` to display data from running tasks.

For each pilot, the db file will contain

* `subjects` - a list of {class}`~.data.subject.Subject`s that run on that pilot. The Subject class keeps track of which
  pilot it was assigned to, but at the moment the pilot db file will be used to actually dispatch the task to that pilot
* `ip` - the last known IP address the pilot has connected from
* `prefs` - the prefs for that pilot

In the future the pilot_db will also track the versions and hashes for autopilot and any plugins running on other pilots

## launch_autopilot.sh

A launch script created by {mod}`.setup` to launch the configured autopilot agent. Will enable any virtual environment
that is detected when configuring, start and external daemons that need to be started, and explicitly pass the location
of the `prefs.json` file that determine its operation.

## calibration

Calibration files for individual hardware objects identified by group and ID (see [configuring hardware](configuration.md#configure-hardware)
and {meth}`~.Hardware.calibration`).

When the `calibration` property of any hardware object is set, the dictionary passed is then stored as a .json file. 

For example, the {class}`~.hardware.gpio.Solenoid` class stores a calibration generated by {class}`.menus.tools.Calibrate_Water`
that converts an open duration to a volume of fluid dispensed. If a given solenoid's group and id are `PORTS` and `L`, 
we'd get a file `PORTS_L.json` that looks like:

```json
{
  "intercept": 2.667731629392975, 
  "slope": 5.591054313099041
}
```

## data

Each {mod}`~.data.subject.Subject` has a corresponding `.h5` file that stores its history, biographical information,
and data collected during tasks. The data directory is searched in by default for a subject's .h5 file, so it is possible
to access a subject's data by just instantiating the subject object with its ID (ie. `Subject(subject_id)`) rather 
than passing its full location. To use the subject class with data outside the data directory pass the containing directory
as the `dir` argument.

## logs

Many (and eventually all) autopilot objects have a `logger` attribute created with {func}`~.utils.loggers.init_logger`
like `self.logger = init_logger(self)` that inspects the object to create a logger based on its module and `id`. 

Logfiles are created for each module, and then if an object has a `name` or `id` attribute it will be used in 
each log message to identify the source. Logfiles are also created for any classes run as separate processes
(like {class}`~.stim.sound.jackclient.JackClient`) because separate processes can't write to the same file without
overwriting each other. Logfiles are also rotated using suffixes like `.1`, `.2` to keep individual log files
manageable and browsable by typical text editors while maintaining as much history as is desired.

Logs are written to `stdout` using the {class}`rich.logging.RichHandler` for greater interpretability:

```{image} ../_images/logging.png
:alt: Logging output formatted by the Rich output handler, that formats text into three columns showing the message's source, severity, message.
:width: 100%
```

Since logs take time to write to both stdout and to files, we recommend keeping your log level to `INFO` or `WARNING`
during normal operation --- where we assume performance is usually a priority. the `DEBUG` mode will print a huge number
of messages, including every network transaction, etc.

Logging is configured using a few `prefs`:

* `LOGLEVEL` - All messages above this loglevel will be written to file and stdout, possible options are:
    * `DEBUG` - Detailed information about system operation to fix problems
    * `INFO` - Information about major operations that don't require any special attention but are good to know when they happen
    * `WARNING` - Warnings that don't break system operation but might make recommendations, alert the user about implicit or automatic
      activity that might not be desirable, etc.
    * `ERROR` - Errors that prevent normal system operation, but have been handled in such a way that the whole process hasn't crashed.
* `LOGSIZE` - The maximum size of an individual logfile (in bytes), the default being 5MB
* `LOGNUM` - The number of rotating logfiles of size `LOGSIZE` to keep

When running autopilot as a systemd daemon, you can access stderr logs that are not caught by the logger because they are
unexpected or otherwise outside normal system operation by using `journalctl -u autopilot`, or to just see the end use the `-e` flag.

## plugins

See the [Using Plugins](plugins.rst) documentation, as well as the {mod}`~.utils.plugins` and {mod}`~.utils.registry` modules.

Plugins are where you do your work!

Plugins contain additional {class}`.Task`, {class}`.Hardware`, or other autopilot types (see {class}`~.registry.REGISTRIES`) 
that can be accessed by the {func}`.registry.get` function to extend the basic functionality of autopilot. We recommend
making plugins as versioned subfolders within the plugin directory to keep track of changes and make the easier to share,
but at the moment there is no restriction on their structure.

Plugins will be automatically imported if the `AUTOPLUGIN` pref is set to `True`. Autopilot will attempt to import each
file within the plugin directory, but since plugins can contain scripts or other files not intended to extend autopilot,
may log a number of exceptions which can be ignored, but provide details about where each plugin is failing to import.

## protocols

See the {class}`.models.protocol.Step_Data` and {class}`.models.protocol.Protocol_Data` classes, as well
as the :class:`.Protocol_Wizard` which creates them.

Each Protocol consists of a list of parameter dictionaries for a number of individual tasks with graduation criteria for
moving between them. Protocols within the protocol directory can be assigned (:meth:`.Subject.assign_protocol`)
by name (filename excluding `.json`), and the representation of the protocol stored within the Subject file
is updated when it detects that the protocol file has changed.

## sounds

Sound files used by the :class:`sounds.File` class, transferred to pilots when used in a task. 


